This is occurring between 36 and 40. 36 and 40. And I
take it you were doing the testing of the camera in
39, is that right? Oh, we started that about 38, I
believe. Okay. I'm not quite sure. That was about
38, the first camera. Now, was your work really in
seismic testing? Was this leading to your
master's thesis? No. I just never thought about
thesis here. Okay. But I just didn't worry about
such things as that. I was interested in working on
this program and we realized that when the time
came that I was supposed to get a degree where then I
would take some hunk of this large piece of work we
were doing and call that my thesis and write it up on
that basis. Then a
geology professor from the University of
Virginia was a very good friend of Franklin
Roosevelt's. He talked Roosevelt into
sponsoring a year's expedition in the South
Pacific. We were going to go in the Alexander
Hamilton, one of the great 327-foot Coast Guard
cutters.
Summer of 39, I guess it was, we all just worked like
dogs getting ready for that because we were going
to spend two months in each of the major island
groups in the South Pacific. That was canceled
about three days before sailing time because of
the war clouds. It was probably unfortunate,
because if we'd gone through with it, we would have
probably learned a good deal more about the South
Pacific before we moved into it. I think in summing
up some of the educational
things, I was interested in geophysics and sort of
problem-oriented.
Curricula was really one pretty much of classical
physics, which I wasn't very much interested in,
which was probably not very smart of me, but I was.
And I never really worried very much about whether
I got a degree or not. That was very secondary.
We had some very fine professors in the
university. And I think one of the things we
learned, a great deal of versatility in getting
things done. There was very little money. Partly
you had to do it yourself. Partly you designed
according to what you could do. The facilities
that you had, the lathes or machine shops you had.
Incidentally, much of the work was done after
midnight because Only then could you break out
your bogus master keys and so forth. And I want to
pay special tribute to the many service,
wonderful service people in universities and so
forth that help you along the mechanics, the
policemen, and people like that who oftentimes
make life far more livable. For six months, I lived
illegally in the laboratory. slept on the floor in
my research lab. And many is the time the policeman
would open up the gymnasium in the middle of the
night so we could take showers after working. And
many is the night he came into my room and closed the
windows if it was raining or snowing on me, even
though I was engaged in illicit behavior. Those
are things one remembers a long time.
Ewing
and Islin, of course, got to know each other in
their respective work. We were going out on the
Atlantis. And Islin was very involved
in international matters and concerns. after the
war had broken out in Europe, it seemed inevitable
that we were going to get into it. And he put in a
proposal to the
National Research Council to
get the oceanographic involved in the field of
underwater sound and so forth. He turned to Morris
Ewing because Ewing was a contemporary who was
experienced in seagoing work, experienced in
geophysics and underwater sound. In 1940,
fall of 1940, I think it was October, after we came
back from a trip on the Atlantis down to
Jacksonville, testing our, using our seismic and
camera equipment, this contract appeared to go
through, and Warzel, Ewing, and Bob McCurdy and I
came from Lehigh up to Woods Hole to go to work on
this. Are you talking about a contract for
anti-submarine warfare? It was a contract for
anti-submarine, basically anti-submarine
warfare work. And this is in October 1940? This is
in October of 1940. The
first job, well at that moment I guess one could say
the first job was that Ewing went up to talk to Islin
and he telephoned back from Woods Hole and said the
deal had gone through. that could Wurzel and I
clean out the laboratory and get up there in 48
hours. So we hired a five-ton truck and took
everything apart in 48 hours, of which about 12
hours, many hours, consisted of taking library
books back to the library.
The primary job there at Woods Hole And I might say a
word about Woods Hole. This was at the end of the
summer. The building was almost completely
empty. The Atlantis with her crew of 13 or 14 people
was about. There were about five other people in
the oceanographic building, and we had it pretty
much to ourselves.
The general understanding of sound transmission
through the water was the primary problem we
devoted ourselves to. The theory of it, trying to
get the,
with principal emphasis on the bathymograph for
shallow water and looking at historical records
for deep water conditions. We sort of divided the
effort, but everybody worked on, rotated and
almost everybody worked on every piece of it from
time to time. One of my principal concerns was to
see if we could convert the bath thermograph from
working at four knots to see if we could make it work
at 15 knots and to go deeper and to make it more
reliable. and to build winches so it could do this
also.
The other problem which Ewing spearheaded, but we
all spent a great deal of time on it, was the
refraction of sound in seawater. And actually,
from the first of October to February, when the
report was written of sound transmission in
seawater, which was, I believe, an extremely fine
and fundamental document, even to this day, as
elementary as it was, why it was still a basically
sound document.
Clearly building on other work that had been done
by other people and so forth, but tying it
together.
There is a certain amount of unfairness in many
things. The people at Scripps and at the Naval
Electronics Laboratory in San Diego were working
on the same problem.
I guess we beat them to the press by a very short
length of time, and perhaps it was a little more a
little more complete, and certainly the report
that Woods Hole put out, which was largely a result
of Ewing and Islin combining physics and
oceanography on a problem. It was the teamwork of
that group, and certainly my involvement was
support rather than the major part of it. That was a
very monumental document at that time.
The point I want to make is that the people on the
West Coast were doing very much of the same kind of
work with a somewhat different tack. And the work
they did supported it, broadened the field, and so
forth. Well,
during that war period, as the institution grew,
you took on all sorts of jobs. And versatility was
the game here. Underwater sound was by all odds the
principal part of it. Excuse me, you stayed at
Woods Hole then from 40 to 45 doing any submarine
research? Yes. Okay. Now, but you're in Operation
Crossroad in 46? Yes. Right, okay. Now, did Ewing
stay between 40 and 45 here too? Ewing was here all
through then until he left in 46, spring of 46.
Spring of 46. Yes.
What about Revell? Ravel was at Scripps, and then
he, working closely with the Naval Electronics
Laboratory, it became the Naval Electronics
Laboratory, also an underwater sound
oceanography. Then he got in the Navy as an
officer, and he went to Washington. And here I
think the important thing is that Ravel was Mr.
Oceanography in Washington. There was no
question about that. one of the things in which the
country as a whole was fortunate, and certainly as
an individual I was very fortunate, to have this
great triumvirate of smart, concerned
scientists, Morris Ewing, Roger Revelle, and
Columbus Isley. Okay, now what all these
questions are leading to is, what I really want to
know is, when did you first meet Revelle? I would
say I probably met Revelle in about 42. Okay. Well,
good. Possibly earlier. I'm not sure of this. Is
this through Granny's submarine work? Yes. Okay.
Well, I had met him before. Yeah. But just at
meetings, and I didn't know him before. Okay. When
I got to know Revelle was when you, you know, after
working until 6 o'clock in the morning with... all
day long until 6 o'clock in the morning with people
time after time, that's when you get to know them.
He told me he met you during the war in any submarine
war. Yes. Okay. And I wasn't trying to mislead you
on the tape, but I somehow or another assumed that
he had met you when he had come, when you guys had
done it together. So I placed you out at the Pacific
for a while. No. Okay. No, he was Mr. Oceanography
there, and we had perhaps met then, but I didn't
really get to know him until he got to Washington.
What sort of work were you doing in ASMRing warfare
with acoustics? What were you looking for?
The basic problem was, from the physics
standpoint of it, the basic scientific point of
view was to study the transmission of sound
through the ocean. That was the basic title of
contracts that Ravel led to about three
laboratories for about one decade or a decade and a
half. This was the simple statement that
justified the expenditure of at least half of the
money going into oceanography. It was
interpreted very broadly by all the people
concerned. And usually, if you take almost any
broad problem, and in fundamental problem,
interpret it broadly, and tackle it
intelligently, that ends up by taking in about
half of oceanography. And this was the case. I
wanted to come back to this, saying that I believe
the country as a whole was very lucky. that Ewing,
Revelle, and Islin were a trio of three wonderful
people, talented people, that were fortunate
enough to be able to stay together, I mean to
operate, and they were, the three together, were
really Mr. Oceanography for about 15 years. They
were all highly respected by military people,
congressmen, laymen, and so forth. They were
educated people, educated and concerned. And it
was this coherence in the business that was so very
important. In the field of oceanography during
the war, first with the elementary fundamental
parts on the sound transmission, then getting the
equipment. We had classes of junior naval
officers come to Woods Hole, and in one week we gave
them a taste of what they were supposed to tell
their superiors when they took the bath
thermograph and put it out in the fleet.
Incidentally, we built about 250 bath
thermographs here in Woods Hole in our shops.
waiting for production people to get them into
production. I was sort of Revell's manager for the
bath thermographic equipment, commercial bath
thermographic equipment and winches and so forth
in commercial production. So I spent about 20% of
my time on that.
Bureau of Ordinance, long about this time, fairly
early in the war, in fact, very early in the war, the
Ordinance Department came to us with underwater
photography. For example, shortly after Pearl
Harbor, we were accosted to see how practical was
it to make a photographic mosaic every day of the
bottom of the entrance to Pearl Harbor.
For About one month, nearly all other projects
around here were dropped while we worked on that
project. Some of the earliest underwater
television, some of the early television was put
in cases and put underwater, and we learned how to
manipulate it and so forth in ways that were very
crude and probably wouldn't have done the job very
well. it would have done it some.
Furthermore, when the Navy thought they had sunk a
submarine, a German submarine along our coast, we
ended up with the job of taking one of our ships out
and having our people go out and see if they could
photograph the wreck and determine what
submarine it was. Usually it was a collier sunk in
the previous war. But That certainly produced a
great deal of field work and an acquaintance with
the problems of field work. One of the interesting
things about this, this was an era in which a great
many young people came through and got acquainted
with oceanography. John Ewing, Rusty Tyree, a
large number of young people who were here for a
while, then went off to war or other places in
education and came back into the game later on.
Then I spent some time on submarines, both in the
photographic game and the sound transmission
game. But then we got involved with the, when I say
we, Woods Hole, Ewing, Islin, and so forth, with
building bath thermographs for submarines,
because it was felt submarines needed a bath
thermograph.
We designed up about four models. Ewing and I were
doing most of this work, because at that time,
Warzel was more heavily involved in the
photography. We built about four models of bath
thermographs, which were tested in Key West. And
one rather interesting part about that, I believe
model number four was finally accepted by the Navy
as being okay to put into production. We received
that word on a Thursday. Also on Thursday, Ewing
and I figured we knew how the thing really should be
built. And so we redesigned the submarine
bathymograph. We built models. We tested the
devil out of them all weekend. And Monday morning,
the manufacturers, the Bristol company, came
around, sent by the Navy to put the instrument in
production. And we put the new untested model in
production.
This sounds more horrible now than it did in those
days, because in those days, there was a greater
tendency to do what you thought was right. And the
idea of operating by committee was still pretty
remote. But if I may knock on wood, we were very
lucky on that, because that ended up being a best
demographic to which, to my knowledge, only two of
them ever quit on patrol.
There were, of course, some 40 submarines that
never came back, but presumably only a few. The
bath thermograph for submarines was exceedingly
important. And I think it was exceedingly
important to the history of oceanography. I'm
probably guilty of overstating this, and I put it
into the history because I think it is important
item for historians to think about. It
was important because it was an instrument that
was generally located within a few feet of the
commanding officer when he was at his command
stations. It was an instrument that not only
helped
excuse me, what the instrument did, it gave an
indication of temperature versus depth. It was on
a little smoke three-by-five card. It was
generally within a few feet of the commanding
officer. If there was a temperature gradient, it
indicated a customary thing of isothermal water,
a temperature gradient, and then rolled
isothermal water below. It indicated that sound
conditions above might be good. If the submarine
got below... that then your chances of evasion
would be much greater. And there is no question
about it. Any instrument that helps a man survive
is going to be an instrument that is respected. An
instrument that helps them make an attack is also
going to be respected.
The submarine people clearly understood that the
ocean was three-dimensional, and I believe it was
this simpatico relationship between
oceanographers and submarine people, with a bath
thermograph being the device that did it more than
anything else, meant that when the war was over,
the A large number of submarine people who were
some of the Navy's best, not by any means their only
best, but some of their best, were firm believers
in the bath thermograph and pretty firm believers
in oceanography. Incidentally, I think that the
best recommendation that the bath thermograph
ever received, and it was certainly a tribute to
oceanography,
The one captain said that when he had been
executive officer and when they had made an attack
off the island of Truk, which was in trade wind
country with deep ice thermal water, they knew
they would take a pasting because sound
conditions were excellent and they stood a very
good chance of getting sunk. The submarine made
their attack. They dove, and as they passed about
100 feet, the executive officer leaned over with
his finger and put a false negative gradient on the
bath thermograph because he figured that way the
crew would see it and they would feel better. And
there was a man that understood both the bath
thermograph and he understood his crew. Along
about the time that Ewing and Warzel time we were
all getting involved in sound channel work, the
importance of the sound channel might exist.
I had started working with the submarine people,
and it seemed to me that with the submarine bath
demograph and the submarine people,
Oceanography stood a chance to do some real good.
Here were some people that had an opportunity to
use oceanographic information in a way that
destroyer people cannot, because the destroyer
man cannot dive to take advantage of temperature
gradients.
Therefore, I pretty much committed my time
exclusively to the submarine bath thermograph
for most of the rest of the war. At this time, along
about this One of my regrets then was that I had to
get out of the experimental acoustic business and
working with Ewing and Islin on the sound channel
work, which turned out to be so extremely
important, although it did not turn out to be
useful during the war.
A small group of us at Woods Hole, starting with
Bill Chevelle, myself, and Bumpus, and Ewing
some, under the general cognizance of Dr.
Redfield, General Direction,
we tried to ride each American submarine on it, and
some foreigners on it, some foreign submarines on
their deep dives out of local test areas and so
forth, to indoctrinate the crew about the bath
thermograph, to talk to them about its use in
underwater sound, about its use in diving,
because we had been asked by the Navy to see if
oceanographic information could be of help to
them in diving through density gradients they
found that had provided serious density
anomalies in the diving of submarines. A
difference of one part in a thousand in the density
of water represents a difference of about two tons
in the buoyancy of the submarine. And normally a
submarine has to pump when it goes deep, but in the
summer, oftentimes it had to flood. These could
have serious implications in the operation of the
submarine. And when they all had noisy pumps, it
made a tremendous amount of difference to the
noise they made.
We visited a wide variety of places, mostly New
London, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, Manitowoc,
Wisconsin, Key West, a little bit in Panama, and
Mare Island in California. giving lectures to
submarine groups, but writing the submarines,
taking information that would relate to how much
the submarines compressed, because the
submarine hull compresses
more than water does.
It took about a year's work to bring simple theory
and observations and a line of rationale and a line
of education and manuals so we could get this
information across to submarine people. I think
most of this was pretty useful. Many submarine
people found it extremely useful. Many found it
was largely irrelevant. Much of this, some of this
depended upon their personality, but mostly
depended upon the areas they were operating in and
the particular situation jobs they had. But
submarine people were certainly very receptive.
I found nearly all aspects of working with
submarine people were very instructive and very
worthwhile, and I had tremendous respect for
them. In 1944, I went out to Pearl Harbor as the
first of the oceanographers to go out. This was at
the request of Ravel, although it was under his
sponsorship, actually. We'd tried to get out
earlier, but he had worked very hard in trying to
get arrangements for us to go all the way to
Australia, but this meant we got out to Pearl about
two months later than we might have otherwise.